Sensor Subsystem Signoff
FUNCTION OF THE SUBSYSTEM
	The sensor subsystem is the actuator of our Air Quality design. These sensors will analyze and receive data from the outside and send the new data from the interface straight to the microcontroller. Without this subsystem, the device we plan to design could never retrieve any real data for the user to have and use. Therefore, the sensors are a crucial part of the process. For most gas sensors, they are propped up by a PCB board that allocates its data for Master devices to store for data calculation.

	For experimental purposes, the design team has decided to get multiple types of sensors for the modular functionality to the device. These types are digital, analog voltage, and analog current output sensors. While the digital sensors send bits describing the measurement of a specific parameter, the analog sensors send their signals a bit differently. There are pros and cons on analog voltage or current signals in many regards. Voltage outputs for analog components are more common, but current signals are faster and less likely to lose current or voltage drops in the signal process. Current analog sensors have an extra step where a built-in transmitter in the component takes the voltage and sets a current range for the signal to be generated. Once the current signal gets to the microcontroller, it would need to go back to its voltage via a load resistor. The team plans on getting various types of sensors for the design process of this subsystem so that the user of the Air Quality Device will be able to input various sensors that will accurately state the parameter value.

CONSTRAINTS OF THE SUBSYSTEM

	The subsystem constraints are placed to ensure that it can fulfill its job in a satisfactory manner.  The constraints given below are generalized to allow for comparison of any potential contender for the sensors.  Constraints on the subsystem are as follows:

Shall have a selection of tested sensors to cover a range of pollutants, particulates, air composites, and other qualities.  Common qualities to measure are carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen oxides, ozone, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide.  Other qualities may be selected in the future, but these are definite qualities to look for.  These sensors should work independently from each other.
Shall be modular. Specifically, the change of sensor should be seamless and handled by the board and software.
Shall utilize sensors that are interchangeable.  The sensors will have multiple kinds of Input/Output (I/O) ports, so a list will be made that acknowledges all I/O ports of sensors to be approved and tested.  The I/O ports that are shared among a group of sensors should be able to operate seamlessly if swapped out from the same type of I/O port for another sensor in the group using that I/O port.  Sensors that do not share this I/O port will have a port of its own grouping that has this same functionality within that group.
Each sensor must be able to communicate with the microcontroller using a communicative language such as Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), or Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter (UART). Being able to talk with the sensors is crucial towards the pseudo code created in the Microcontroller subsystem.
Shall be able to operate with at least 3 sensors sampling independently of each other.  Sensors will take samples at set intervals and be read and stored on the device periodically.  Samples may be received and outputted one at a time.
The speed for sample rates when receiving analog signal input from the sensors should be sampled at a rate in the range of 44.1kHz - 48 kHz. Having sample rates that are too low causes data to be lost in the data calibration process.
The input voltages from the interface will provide either 3 or 5 V DC. Therefore, each sensor that will be used for the device shall have input voltages in that range and will be properly powered during use. The sensors used will need to be on and working for extended periods of time.
For every sensor that is plugged onto the Air Quality Device initially, there may be a start up time for initial calibration. All sensors shall start data acquisition once the timer goes to 0, and the microcontroller signals the sensors to start.
BUILDABLES OF THE SUBSYSTEM
ANALYSIS OF THE SUBSYSTEM
	The team has chosen 3 sensors for testing that potentially matches with the constraints list. We wanted for each to be a different type of sensor output to test modularity and implement the necessary actions required within the software to model the functionality of both the Microcontroller and Sensor Subsystems. All sensors chosen for experimentation are for detecting Carbon Monoxide, one of the 6 pollutants that our team is wanting for data input. But, one sensor outputs digital values, and the next sensor outputs analog voltage. Thus, the third device for testing will be an analog current sensor so progress on all types can be made in the design process.
This is the analysis of the MQ7 (Analog Voltage?):
The MQ7 Carbon Monoxide Gas Sensor is a quarter-sized PCB mounted with a CO detector that has high sensitivity. This sensor is able to detect the pollutant anywhere from 20-2000 ppm. The sensitivity can be changed with the potentiometer located next to the detector.
The MQ7 has an input voltage range of 1.4V - 5V, but 5V is recommended for the accurate output of this sensor. Also having a decent power consumption with 350mW on average
The MQ7 contains 3 pins on the other side of the PCB. Pin 1 is for output, 2 is GND, and of course, Pin 3 is for 5V. This makes wiring easier for the user and does not put too much force on current or wattage.
Lastly, the MQ7 is commonly used with Arduino devices which we plan to use for the microcontroller. Code tasked to receive samples from the sensor is given within the “Buildables of the Subsystem” section.
